Elagabalus (Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Augustus, ca. 203 – 11 March 222), also known as Heliogabalus, was Roman Emperor from 218 to 222. A member of the Severan Dynasty, he was Syrian on his mother's side, the son of Julia Soaemias and Sextus Varius Marcellus. In his youth he served as a priest of the god Elagabal (in Latin, Elagabalus) in the hometown of his mother's family, Emesa. As a private citizen, he was probably named Sextus Varius Avitus Bassiansus. Upon becoming emperor he took the name Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Augustus. He was called Elagabalus only after his death.
In 217, the emperor Caracalla was assassinated and replaced by his Praetorian prefect, Marcus Opellius Macrinus. Caracalla's maternal aunt, Julia Maesa, successfully instigated a revolt among the Third Legion to have her eldest grandson (and Caracalla's cousin), Elagabalus, declared emperor in his place. Macrinus was defeated on 8 June 218, at the Battle of Antioch. Elagabalus, barely fourteen years old, became emperor, initiating a reign remembered mainly for sexual scandal and religious controversy.
If later, hostile historians can be believed, Elagabalus showed a disregard for Roman religious traditions and sexual taboos. He replaced the traditional head of the Roman pantheon, Jupiter, with the deity of whom he was high priest, Elagabal. He forced leading members of Rome's government to participate in religious rites celebrating this deity, over which he personally presided. Elagabalus was married as many as five times, lavished favors on male courtiers popularly thought to have been his lovers, employed a prototype of whoopee cushions at dinner parties, and was reported to have prostituted himself in the imperial palace. His behavior estranged the Praetorian Guard, the Senate, and the common people alike.
Amidst growing opposition, Elagabalus, just 18 years old, was assassinated and replaced by his cousin Alexander Severus on 11 March 222, in a plot formulated by his grandmother, Julia Maesa, and carried out by disaffected members of the Praetorian Guard.
Elagabalus developed a reputation among his contemporaries for extreme eccentricity, decadence and zealotry which was likely exaggerated by his successors and political rivals. This tradition has persisted, and in writers of the early modern age he suffers one of the worst reputations among Roman emperors. Edward Gibbon, for example, wrote that Elagabalus abandoned himself to the grossest pleasures and ungoverned fury. According to B.G. Niebuhr, The name Elagabalus is branded in history above all others because of his unspeakably disgusting life. More recent writers have tried to separate fact from fiction, presenting a more guarded view of Elagabalus and his emperorship.

 Family and Priesthood

Elagabalus was born around the year 203 to Sextus Varius Marcellus and Julia Soaemias Bassiana. His father was initially a member of the equestrian class, but was later elevated to the rank of senator. His grandmother Julia Maesa was the widow of the Consul Julius Avitus, the sister of Julia Domna, and the sister-in-law of emperor Septimius Severus.
His mother Julia Soaemias was a cousin of Roman emperor Caracalla. Other relatives included his aunt Julia Avita Mamaea and uncle Marcus Julius Gessius Marcianus and their son Alexander Severus. Elagabalus's family held hereditary rights to the priesthood of the sun god Elagabal, of whom Elagabalus was the high priest at Emesa (modern Homs) in Syria.
The deity Elagabalus was initially venerated at Emesa. The name is the Latinized form of the Syrian Ilāh hag-Gabal, which derives from Ilāh (god) and gabal (mountain (compare Hebrew: גבל‎ gəbul and Arabic: جبل‎ jabal)), resulting in the God of the Mountain the Emesene manifestation of the deity. The cult of the deity spread to other parts of the Roman Empire in the 2nd century. For example, a dedication has been found as far away as Woerden (Netherlands). The god was later imported and assimilated with the Roman sun god known as Sol Indiges in republican times and as Sol Invictus during the 2nd and 3rd centuries. In Greek the sun god is Helios, hence Heliogabalus, another variant name for Elagabalus.
 Rise to power

When the emperor Macrinus came to power, he suppressed the threat against his reign by the family of his assassinated predecessor, Caracalla, by exiling them—Julia Maesa, her two daughters, and her eldest grandson Elagabalus—to their estate at Emesa in Syria. Almost upon arrival in Syria she began a plot, with her advisor and Elagabalus' tutor Gannys, to overthrow Macrinus and elevate the fourteen-year-old Elagabalus to the imperial throne.
Elagabalus' mother publicly declared that he was the illegitimate son of Caracalla, therefore due the loyalties of Roman soldiers and senators who had sworn allegiance to Caracalla. After Julia Maesa displayed her wealth to the Third Legion at Raphana they swore allegiance to Elagabalus. At sunrise on 16 May 218, Publius Valerius Comazon Eutychianus, commander of the legion, declared him emperor. To strengthen his legitimacy through further propaganda, Elagabalus assumed Caracalla's names, Marcus Aurelius Antoninus.
In response Macrinus dispatched his Praetorian prefect Ulpius Julianus to the region with a contingent of troops he considered strong enough to crush the rebellion. However, this force soon joined the faction of Elagabalus when, during the battle, they turned on their own commanders. The officers were killed and Julianus' head was sent back to the emperor.
Macrinus now sent letters to the Senate denouncing Elagabalus as the False Antoninus and claiming he was insane. Both consuls and other high-ranking members of Rome's leadership condemned Elagabalus, and the Senate subsequently declared war on both Elagabalus and Julia Maesa.
Macrinus and his son, weakened by the desertion of the Second Legion due to bribes and promises circulated by Julia Maesa, were defeated on 8 June 218 at the Battle of Antioch by troops commanded by Gannys. Macrinus fled toward Italy, disguised as a courier, but was later intercepted near Chalcedon and executed in Cappadocia. His son Diadumenianus, sent for safety to the Parthian court, was captured at Zeugma and also put to death.
Elagabalus declared the date of the victory at Antioch to be the beginning of his reign and assumed the imperial titles without prior senatorial approval, which violated tradition but was a common practice among 3rd-century emperors nonetheless. Letters of reconciliation were dispatched to Rome extending amnesty to the Senate and recognizing the laws, while also condemning the administration of Macrinus and his son.
The senators responded by acknowledging Elagabalus as emperor and accepting his claim to be the son of Caracalla. Caracalla and Julia Domna were both deified by the Senate, both Julia Maesa and Julia Soaemias were elevated to the rank of Augustae, and the memory of both Macrinus and Diadumenianus was condemned by the Senate. The former commander of the Third Legion, Comazon, was appointed commander of the Praetorian Guard.
 Emperor (218)
 First year

Elagabalus and his entourage spent the winter of 218 in Bithynia at Nicomedia, where the emperor's religious beliefs first presented themselves as a problem. The contemporary historian Cassius Dio suggests that Gannys was in fact killed by the new emperor because he was forcing Elagabalus to live temperately and prudently. To help Romans adjust to the idea of having an oriental priest as emperor, Julia Maesa had a painting of Elagabalus in priestly robes sent to Rome and hung over a statue of the goddess Victoria in the Senate House. This placed senators in the awkward position of having to make offerings to Elagabalus whenever they made offerings to Victoria.
The legions were dismayed at his behaviour and quickly came to regret having supported his accession. While Elagabalus was still on his way to Rome, brief revolts broke out by the Fourth Legion at the instigation of Gellius Maximus, and the Third Legion, which itself had been responsible for the elevation of Elagabalus to the throne, under the command of Senator Verus. The rebellion was quickly put down, and the Third Legion disbanded.
When the entourage reached Rome in the autumn of 219, Comazon and other allies of Julia Maesa and Elagabalus were given powerful and lucrative positions, to the outrage of many senators who did not consider them worthy of such privileges. After his tenure as Praetorian prefect, Comazon would serve as the city prefect of Rome three times, and as consul twice. Elagabalus soon devalued the Roman currency. He decreased the silver purity of the denarius from 58% to 46.5% — the actual silver weight dropping from 1.82 grams to 1.41 grams. He also demonetized the antoninianus during this period in Rome.
Elagabalus tried to have his presumed lover, the charioteer Hierocles, declared Caesar, while another alleged lover, the athlete Aurelius Zoticus, was appointed to the non-administrative but influential position of Master of the Chamber, or Cubicularius. His offer of amnesty for the Roman upper class was largely honored, though the jurist Ulpian was exiled.
The relationships between Julia Maesa, Julia Soaemias, and Elagabalus were strong at first. His mother and grandmother became the first women to be allowed into the Senate, and both received senatorial titles: Soaemias the established title of Clarissima, and Maesa the more unorthodox Mater Castrorum et Senatus (Mother of the army camp and of the Senate). While Julia Maesa tried to position herself as the power behind the throne and thus the most powerful woman in the world, Elagabalus would prove to be highly independent, set in his ways, and impossible to control.
 Religious controversy

Since the reign of Septimius Severus, sun worship had increased throughout the Empire. Elagabalus saw this as an opportunity to install Elagabal as the chief deity of the Roman pantheon. The god was renamed Deus Sol Invictus, meaning God the Undefeated Sun, and honored above Jupiter.
As a token of respect for Roman religion, however, Elagabalus joined either Astarte, Minerva, Urania, or some combination of the three to Elagabal as wife. Before constructing a temple in dedication to Elagabal, Elagabalus placed the meteorite of Elagabal next to the throne of Jupiter at the temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus.
He caused further discontent when he himself married the Vestal Virgin Aquilia Severa, claiming the marriage would produce god-like children. This was a flagrant breach of Roman law and tradition, which held that any Vestal found to have engaged in sexual intercourse was to be buried alive.
A lavish temple called the Elagabalium was built on the east face of the Palatine Hill to house Elagabal, who was represented by a black conical meteorite from Emesa.Herodian wrote this stone is worshipped as though it were sent from heaven; on it there are some small projecting pieces and markings that are pointed out, which the people would like to believe are a rough picture of the sun, because this is how they see them.
In order to become the high priest of his new religion, Elagabalus had himself circumcised. He forced senators to watch while he danced around the altar of Deus Sol Invictus to the accompaniment of drums and cymbals. Each summer solstice he held a festival dedicated to the god, which became popular with the masses because of the free food distributed on such occasions. During this festival, Elagabalus placed the Emesa stone on a chariot adorned with gold and jewels, which he paraded through the city:



The most sacred relics from the Roman religion were transferred from their respective shrines to the Elagabalium, including the Great Mother, the fire of Vesta, the Shields of the Salii and the Palladium, so that no other god could be worshipped except in company with Elagabal.
 Sex/gender controversy

Elagabalus' sexual orientation and gender identity are the subject of much debate. Elagabalus married and divorced five women, three of whom are known. His first wife was Julia Cornelia Paula; the second was the Vestal Virgin Julia Aquilia Severa.
Within a year, he abandoned her and married Annia Aurelia Faustina, a descendant of Marcus Aurelius and the widow of a man recently executed by Elagabalus. He had returned to his second wife Severa by the end of the year. According to Cassius Dio, his most stable relationship seems to have been with his chariot driver, a blond slave from Caria named Hierocles, whom he referred to as his husband.
The Augustan History claims that he also married a man named Zoticus, an athlete from Smyrna, in a public ceremony at Rome. Cassius Dio reported that Elagabalus would paint his eyes, epilate his hair and wear wigs before prostituting himself in taverns, brothels, and even in the imperial palace:



Herodian commented that Elagabalus enhanced his natural good looks by the regular application of cosmetics. He was described as having been delighted to be called the mistress, the wife, the queen of Hierocles and was said to have offered vast sums of money to any physician who could equip him with female genitalia. Elagabalus has been characterized by some modern writers as transgender, perhaps transsexual.
 Fall from power
By 221 Elagabalus' eccentricities, particularly his relationship with Hierocles, increasingly provoked the soldiers of the Praetorian Guard. When Elagabalus' grandmother Julia Maesa perceived that popular support for the emperor was waning, she decided that he and his mother, who had encouraged his religious practices, had to be replaced. As alternatives, she turned to her other daughter Julia Avita Mamaea and her son, the thirteen-year-old Severus Alexander.
Prevailing on Elagabalus, she arranged that he appoint his cousin Alexander as his heir and be given the title of Caesar. Alexander shared the consulship with the emperor that year. However, Elagabalus reconsidered this arrangement when he began to suspect that the Praetorian Guard preferred his cousin above himself.
Following the failure of various attempts at Alexander's life, Elagabalus stripped his cousin of his titles, revoked his consulship, and circulated the news that Alexander was near death, in order to see how the Praetorians would react. A riot ensued, and the guard demanded to see Elagabalus and Alexander in the Praetorian camp.
 Assassination (222)
The emperor complied and on 11 March 222 he presented his cousin along with his cousin's mother, Julia Soaemias. On their arrival the soldiers started cheering Alexander while ignoring Elagabalus, who ordered the summary arrest and execution of anyone who had taken part in this display of insubordination. In response, members of the Praetorian Guard attacked Elagabalus and his mother:



Following his assassination, many associates of Elagabalus were killed or deposed, including Hierocles and Comazon. His religious edicts were reversed and the stone of Elagabal was sent back to Emesa. Women were barred from attending meetings of the Senate. The practice of damnatio memoriae—erasing from the public record a personage formerly of note—was systematically applied in his case.
 Legacy
 Historiography

Many defamatory stories were circulated about Elagabalus, and his eccentricities were probably exaggerated. One of the most notorious incidents laid to his account is immortalized in the 19th-century painting The Roses of Heliogabalus. It shows guests at one of his extravagant dinner parties smothered under a mass of violets and other flowers dropped from the ceiling.
 Augustan History
The source of many of these stories of Elagabalus's depravity is the Augustan History (Historia Augusta), which scholarly consensus now regards as unreliable in details. The Historia Augusta was most likely written toward the end of the 4th century during the reign of emperor Theodosius I, drawing as much upon the invention of its author as on older, attested sources. The life of Elagabalus as described in the Augustan History is mainly judged a work of historical fiction. Only sections 13 to 17, relating to the fall of Elagabalus, are thought to be of historical value.
 Cassius Dio
Sources more credible than the Augustan History include the contemporary historians Cassius Dio and Herodian. Cassius Dio lived from the second half of the 2nd century until sometime after 229. Born into a patrician family, he spent the greater part of his life in public service. He was a senator under emperor Commodus and governor of Smyrna after the death of Septimius Severus. Afterwards he served as suffect consul around 205, and as proconsul in Africa and Pannonia.
Alexander Severus held him in high esteem and made him his consul again. His Roman History spans nearly a millennium, from the arrival of Aeneas in Italy until the year 229. As a contemporary of Elagabalus, Cassius Dio's account of his reign is generally considered more reliable than the Augustan History, although by his own admission Dio spent the greater part of the relevant period outside of Rome and had to rely on second-hand accounts.
Furthermore, the political climate in the aftermath of Elagabalus' reign, as well as Dio's own position within the government of Alexander, likely influenced the truth of this part of his history for the worse. Dio regularly refers to Elagabalus as Sardanapalus, partly to distinguish him from his divine namesake, but chiefly to do his part in maintaining the damnatio memoriae enforced after the emperor's death and to associate him with another autocrat notorious for a debauched life.
 Herodian

Another contemporary of Elagabalus was Herodian, who was a minor Roman civil servant who lived from c. 170 until 240. His work, History of the Roman Empire since Marcus Aurelius, commonly abbreviated as Roman History, is an eyewitness account of the reign of Commodus until the beginning of the reign of Gordian III. His work largely overlaps with Dio's own Roman History, but both texts seem to be independently consistent with each other.
Although Herodian is not deemed as reliable as Cassius Dio, his lack of literary and scholarly pretensions make him less biased than senatorial historians. Herodian is considered the most important source for the religious reforms which took place during the reign of Elagabalus, which have been confirmed by modern numismatic and archaeological evidence.
 Edward Gibbon
For readers of the modern age, The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire by Edward Gibbon (1737–94) further cemented the scandalous reputation of Elagabalus. Gibbon not only accepted and expressed outrage at the allegations of the ancient historians, but he appears to have added some details of his own; he is the first historian known to state that Gannys was a eunuch, for example. Gibbon wrote:






 Recent historians
More recent historians have begun to reassess the evidence about Elagabalus and have presented a quite different picture of his life and reign and the reasons for his demise. Martijn Icks in Images of Elagabalus (2008; republished as The Crimes of Elagabalus in 2012) cites the unreliability of the ancient sources and concludes that it was the emperor's unorthodox religious policies rather than his sexual behavior that so alienated the power elite of Rome that his grandmother saw fit to eliminate him and replace him with his cousin.
Leonardo de Arrizabalaga y Prado, in The Emperor Elagabalus: Fact of Fiction? (2008), is even more critical of the ancient historians and speculates that neither religion nor sexuality played a role in fall of the young emperor, who was simply the loser in a power struggle within the imperial family; the loyalty of the Praetorian Guards was up for sale, and Julia Maesa had the resources to outmaneuver and outbribe her grandson. Once Elagabalus, his mother, and his immediate circle had been murdered, a wholesale propaganda war against his memory resulted in a vicious caricature which has persisted to the present, repeated and often embellished by later historians displaying their own prejudices against effeminacy and other vices which Elagabalus had come to epitomize.
 Elagabalus in later art

Due to the ancient tradition about him, Elagabalus became something of an (anti-)hero to the Decadent movement in the late 19th century. He often appears in literature and other creative media as the epitome of a young, amoral aesthete. His life and character have inspired or at least informed many famous works of art, including the following.
 Literature
Irydion (1836), a play by Zygmunt Krasiński, portrays Elagabalus as a cruel tyrant.
William Wilson (1839) by Edgar Allan Poe opens with an allusion to the wickedness of Elagabalus.
L'Agonie (Agony) (1889), a novel by the French writer Jean Lombard
Joris-Karl Huysmans' À rebours, one of the literary touchstones of the Decadent movement, describes in chapter 2 the ingenuity behind a banquet designed by Des Esseintes, the protagonist, consisting solely of black foodstuffs, intended as a kind of perverse memorial to his lost virility. The episode is partly inspired by the highly artificial, monochromatic feasts that Elagabalus is said to have contrived (Historia Augusta, Life of Elagabalus, chapter 18).
The Sun God (1904), a novel by the English writer Arthur Westcott
De Berg van Licht (The Mountain of Light) (1905), a novel by the Dutch writer Louis Couperus, features a sympathetic portrayal of Elagabalus.
Algabal (1892–1919), a collection of poems by the German poet Stefan George
The Amazing Emperor Heliogabalus (1911), a biography by the Oxford don John Stuart Hay
St. Dorothy, a poem by Algernon Charles Swinburne, which refers to the saint's martyrdom under the emperor Gabalus
Héliogabale ou l'Anarchiste couronné (Heliogabalus or The Anarchist Crowned) (1934) by the French surrealist Antonin Artaud combines essay, biography, and fiction.
Jean Genet is said to have written a play about Heliogabalus during the Nazi Occupation of France, which he later destroyed.
The Lottery in Babylon (1941), a short story by Argentine writer Jorge Luis Borges, contains a brief mention of Heliogabalus.
Confessions of a Mask (1958), a novel by Japanese writer Yukio Mishima. In one scene, the narrator compares his own motivations for cross-dressing as a youth with those of Heliogabalus, emperor of Rome in its period of decay, that destroyer of ancient gods, that decadent, bestial monarch.
Family Favourites (1960), a novel by the Anglo-Argentine writer Alfred Duggan. Heliogabalus is presented through the eyes of a faithful Gaulish bodyguard as a gentle and charming aesthete, personally lovable but lacking political skills. The novel ends with the narrator remarking wistfully that although my beloved lord can never be admitted among the gods because his body was destroyed instead of receiving proper burial, even if he is surrounded by demons [in the next world] his beauty and charm will make them love and serve him.
Child of the Sun (1966), a novel by Lance Horner and Kyle Onstott, better known for writing the novel behind the movie Mandingo.
Super-Eliogabalo (1969), a novel by the Italian writer Alberto Arbasino
Boy Caesar (2004), a novel by the English writer Jeremy Reed
Being an Account of the Life and Death of the Emperor Heliogabolus, a 24-hour comic by Neil Gaiman
Roman Dusk (2008), a novel in the vampire Count Saint-Germain series by Chelsea Quinn Yarbro. In the novel, Heliogabalus has just become Caesar and is depicted on several occasions as the Decadence ensues.
La Consolante (2008), a novel by Anna Gavalda, mentions the emperor and his orgies on page 591.
 Paintings
Heliogabalus, High Priest of the Sun (1866), by the English decadent Simeon Solomon, in the style of Gustave Moreau
The Roses of Heliogabalus (1888), by the Anglo-Dutch academician Sir Lawrence Alma-Tadema
Lui (1906), by Gustav-Adolf Mossa
Heliogabalus (1974), by Anselm Kiefer
Antonin Artaud Heliogabalus (2010–11), by Anselm Kiefer
 Comics
La Dernière Prophétie by Gilles Chaillet depicts the life and reign of Elagabalus in volume 2 (Les dames d'Emèse, 2003) and volume 3 (Sous le signe de Ba'al, 2004).
Vassalord (2006– ), Nanae Chrono's Manga, where the flamboyant main character, Johnny Rayflo (an ancient vampire), is referred to occasionally as The Confined Elagabalus.
Being an Account of the Life and Death of the Emperor Heliogabolus (1991), by Neil Gaiman. Published in Cerebus #147 (1991).
Helioglobolus – biography in the Swedish anthology Galago, by Simon Gärdenfors.
Lychee Hikari Club (2005) by Furuya Usamaru – The main protagonist, Zera, is based on Elagabalus.
 Music
Eliogabalo, an opera by Venetian Baroque composer Francesco Cavalli (1667).
Heliogabale, an opera by French composer Déodat de Séverac which premiered in 1910.
Heliogabalus Imperator (Emperor Heliogabalus), an orchestral work by the German composer Hans Werner Henze (1972).
Eliogabalus, an album by rock band Devil Doll (1990).
Six Litanies for Heliogabalus, by the composer and saxophonist John Zorn (2007).
Elagabalus (as Heliogabalus) is mentioned in the Major-General's Song from the Gilbert and Sullivan opera The Pirates of Penzance: I quote in elegiacs all the crimes of Heliogabalus.
Heliogabale, a French rock band which has released five albums since 1995, among them the full mind is alone the clear recorded by Steve Albini in 1997.
Heliogabalus, a song by Momus from his 2001 album Folktronic, in which the narrator defends Heliogabalus, saying he wasn't to blame for the deaths he caused.
Heliogabalus, an album by Switzerland sludge metal band Rorcal, released in 2010.
The Roman Emperors Song (parody of Michael Jackson's Bad) on series 3 of the popular TV sketch show Horrible Histories.
 Dance
Héliogabale, a contemporary dance choreographed by Maurice Béjart
 Film
Héliogabale, a 1909 silent film by the French director André Calmettes
Héliogabale, ou L'orgie romaine, a 1911 silent short by the French director Louis Feuillade
 Television
Elagabalus appeared in various episodes of the popular sketch show Horrible Histories, played by Mathew Baynton
 Plays
Mencken, H.L. and Nathan, George Jean. Heliogabalus A Buffoonery in Three Acts. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1920.
Escobar, C.H. de. Heliogabalo: O SOL E A PÁTRIA. Ed. Devir. Rio de Janeiro. 1989.
Gilbert, S. Heliogabalus: A Love Story. Toronto, Cabaret Theatre Company, 2002.
Elagabalus, Emperor of Rome (2008), a play by the American dramatist Shawn Ferreyra, which premiered in San Francisco, California, 18 January through 2 February 2008
 Vocabulary
The Spanish word heliogábalo means person overwhelmed by gluttony.
