Radiohead are an English rock band from Abingdon, Oxfordshire, formed in 1985. The band consists of Thom Yorke (lead vocals, guitar, piano), Jonny Greenwood (lead guitar, keyboards, other instruments), Colin Greenwood (bass), Phil Selway (drums, percussion) and Ed O'Brien (guitar, backing vocals).
Radiohead released their debut single Creep in 1992. The song was initially unsuccessful, but it became a worldwide hit several months after the release of their debut album, Pablo Honey (1993). Radiohead's popularity rose in the United Kingdom with the release of their second album, The Bends (1995). Radiohead's third album, OK Computer (1997), propelled them to greater international fame. Featuring an expansive sound and themes of modern alienation, OK Computer is often acclaimed as one of the landmark records of the 1990s.
Kid A (2000) and Amnesiac (2001) marked an evolution in Radiohead's musical style, as the group incorporated experimental electronic music, krautrock and jazz influences. Kid A, though somewhat polarising at the time of its release, is now frequently recognised as one of the most important albums of the 2000s.Hail to the Thief (2003), a mix of piano and guitar driven rock, electronics and lyrics inspired by war, was the band's final album for their major record label, EMI. Radiohead self-released their seventh album, In Rainbows (2007), as a digital download for which customers could set their own price, and later in physical form to critical and chart success. Radiohead's eighth album, The King of Limbs (2011), was an exploration of rhythm and quieter textures, which the band released independently.
Radiohead have sold more than 30 million albums worldwide, with the band's work being placed highly in both listener polls and critics' lists, they have the distinction of doing so in both the 1990s and 2000s. In 2005, Radiohead were ranked number 73 in Rolling Stone's list of The Greatest Artists of All Time, while Jonny Greenwood and Ed O'Brien were both included in Rolling Stone's list of greatest guitarists, and Thom Yorke in their list of greatest singers. In 2009, Rolling Stone readers voted the group the second best artist of the 2000s.
 History

 Formation and first years (1985–91)


The musicians who formed Radiohead met while attending Abingdon School, an independent school for boys in Abingdon, Oxfordshire. Thom Yorke and Colin Greenwood were in the same year, Ed O'Brien and Phil Selway were one year older and Jonny Greenwood two years younger than his brother. In 1985 they formed the band On a Friday, the name referring to the band's usual rehearsal day in the school's music room. The group played their first gig in late 1986 at Oxford's Jericho Tavern; Jonny Greenwood originally joined as a harmonica and then keyboard player, but he soon became the lead guitarist.
Although Yorke, O'Brien, Selway, and Colin Greenwood had left Abingdon by 1987 to attend university, the band continued to rehearse often on weekends and holidays. In 1991, when all the members except Jonny had completed their university degrees, On a Friday regrouped, began to record demos such as Manic Hedgehog, and performed live gigs around Oxford at venues such as The Jericho Tavern. Oxfordshire and the Thames Valley had an active independent music scene in the late 1980s, but it centred around shoegazing bands such as Ride and Slowdive; On a Friday were never seen as fitting this trend, commenting that they had missed it by the time they returned from university.
Nevertheless, as On a Friday's number of live performances increased, record labels and producers became interested. Chris Hufford, Slowdive's producer and the co-owner of Oxford's Courtyard Studios, attended an early On a Friday concert at the Jericho Tavern. Impressed by the band, he and his partner Bryce Edge produced a demo tape and became On a Friday's managers; they remain the band's managers to this day. Following a chance meeting between Colin Greenwood and EMI A&R representative Keith Wozencroft at the record shop where Greenwood worked, the band signed a six-album recording contract with the label in late 1991. At the request of EMI, the band changed their name; Radiohead was taken from title of a song on Talking Heads' True Stories album.
 Pablo Honey, The Bends and early success (1992–95)

Radiohead recorded their debut release, the Drill EP, with Chris Hufford and Bryce Edge at Courtyard Studios. Released in May 1992, its chart performance was very poor. Subsequently, the band enlisted Paul Kolderie and Sean Slade—who had worked with US indie bands Pixies and Dinosaur Jr.—to produce their debut album, recorded quickly in an Oxford studio in 1992. With the release of the Creep single later that year, Radiohead began to receive attention in the British music press, not all of it favourable. NME described them as a lily-livered excuse for a rock band, and Creep was blacklisted by BBC Radio 1 because it was deemed too depressing.
The band released their debut album, Pablo Honey, in February 1993. It stalled at number 22 in the UK charts, as Creep and its anthemic follow-up singles Anyone Can Play Guitar and Stop Whispering failed to become major hits. Pop Is Dead, a non-album single later disavowed by the band, sold equally poorly. Some critics compared the band's early style to the wave of grunge music popular in the early 1990s—to the extent of Radiohead being dubbed Nirvana-lite—yet Pablo Honey failed to make either a critical or a commercial splash upon its initial release. Despite shared influences with popular guitar-heavy acts, and some notice for Yorke's falsetto voice, the band toured only British universities and clubs.
In the first few months of 1993, Radiohead began to attract listeners elsewhere. Creep had been played very frequently on Israeli radio by influential DJ Yoav Kutner, and in March, after the song became a hit in that country's charts, Radiohead were invited to Tel Aviv for their first live gig overseas. Around the same time, the San Francisco alternative radio station KITS added the song to its playlist. Soon other radio stations along the west coast of the United States followed suit. By the time Radiohead began their first North American tour in June 1993, the music video for Creep was in heavy rotation on MTV. The song rose to number two on the US modern rock chart, entered the lower reaches of the top 40 pop chart, and finally hit number seven in the UK Singles Chart when EMI re-released it in the UK in September.
Unexpected attention to the single in America caused the label to improvise new promotional plans, and the band shuttled back and forth between continents, playing over 150 concerts in 1993. Radiohead nearly broke up due to the pressure of sudden success as the Pablo Honey supporting tour extended into its second year. Band members described the tour as difficult to adjust to, saying that towards its end they were still playing the same songs that [they had] recorded two years previously... like being held in a time warp, when they were eager to work on new songs.
The band began work on their second album in 1994, hiring veteran Abbey Road Studios producer John Leckie. Tensions were high, with mounting expectations on the band to deliver a superior follow-up to match or exceed the success of Creep. Recording felt unnatural in the studio, band members having over-rehearsed their material. They sought a change of scenery, touring the Far East, Australasia and Mexico in an attempt to reduce the pressure. The band found greater confidence performing their new music live. However, confronted again by the fame he had achieved, Yorke became disillusioned at being right at the sharp end of the sexy, sassy, MTV eye-candy lifestyle he felt he was helping to sell to the world.
My Iron Lung, an EP and single released late in 1994, was Radiohead's reaction, marking a transition towards the greater depth they aimed for on their second album. Promoted through alternative radio stations, the hard-edged single's sales were better than expected, and suggested for the first time that the band had found a loyal fan base beyond one hit. Having introduced more new songs on tour, Radiohead finished recording their second album by year's end, and they released The Bends in March 1995. The album was driven by dense riffs and ethereal atmospheres from the band's three guitarists, with greater use of keyboards than their debut. It also received stronger reviews for both songwriting and performances.
While Radiohead were seen as outsiders to the Britpop scene that dominated the media's attention at the time, they were finally successful in their home country with The Bends, as singles Fake Plastic Trees, High and Dry, Just, and Street Spirit (Fade Out) made their way to UK chart success; the latter song placed Radiohead in the top five for the first time. In 1995, Radiohead again toured North America and Europe, this time in support of R.E.M., one of their formative influences and at the time one of the biggest rock bands in the world. The buzz generated by such famous fans as Michael Stipe, along with distinctive music videos for Just and Street Spirit, helped to sustain Radiohead's popularity outside the UK.
However, Radiohead's growing fan base was insufficient for them to repeat the commercial popularity of Creep worldwide. High and Dry became a modest hit, but The Bends peaked at 88 on the US album charts, which remains Radiohead's lowest showing there. Radiohead were satisfied with the album's reception. Jonny Greenwood said, I think the turning point for us came about nine or twelve months after The Bends was released and it started appearing in people's [best of] polls for the end of the year. That's when it started to feel like we made the right choice about being a band.
 OK Computer, fame and critical acclaim (1996–98)

In late 1995, Radiohead had already recorded one song that would make their next record. Lucky, released as a single to promote the War Child charity's The Help Album, had come out of a brief session with Nigel Godrich, a young audio engineer who had assisted on The Bends and also produced a 1996 B-side, Talk Show Host. The band decided to produce their next album with Godrich's assistance, and they began work in early 1996. By July they had recorded four songs at their rehearsal studio, Canned Applause, a converted apple shed in the countryside near Didcot, Oxfordshire.
In August 1996, Radiohead toured as the opening act for Alanis Morissette, seeking to perfect their new songs live before completing the record. They then resumed recording, again outside a traditional music studio, settling instead at a 15th-century mansion, St. Catherine's Court, near Bath. The recording sessions were relaxed, with the band playing at all hours of the day, recording songs in different rooms, and listening to The Beatles, DJ Shadow, Ennio Morricone and Miles Davis for inspiration. Radiohead contributed Talk Show Host, as well as a newly recorded song called Exit Music (For a Film), to Baz Luhrmann's adaptation of Romeo + Juliet late in the year. Most of the rest of the album was complete by the end of 1996, and by March 1997, the record was mixed and mastered.
Radiohead released their third album, OK Computer, in June 1997. Largely composed of melodic rock songs, the new record also found the band experimenting with song structures and incorporating some ambient, avant garde and electronic influences, prompting Rolling Stone to call the album a 'stunning art-rock tour de force.' Radiohead denied being part of the progressive rock genre, but critics in the mid-'90s began to compare their work to Pink Floyd, a band whose early 1970s work influenced Greenwood's guitar parts at the time. Some compared OK Computer thematically to Floyd's best-seller The Dark Side of the Moon (1973), although Thom Yorke said the album's lyrics had been inspired by observing the speed of the world in the 1990s. Yorke's lyrics, embodying different characters, had expressed what one magazine called end-of-the-millennium blues in contrast to the more personal songs of The Bends. OK Computer met with great critical acclaim, and Yorke admitted that he was amazed it got the reaction it did. None of us fucking knew any more whether it was good or bad. What really blew my head off was the fact that people got all the things, all the textures and the sounds and the atmospheres we were trying to create.
OK Computer was the band's first number one UK chart debut, propelling Radiohead to commercial success around the world. Despite peaking at number 21 in the US charts, the album eventually met with mainstream recognition there, receiving the first Grammy Awards recognition of the band's career, a win for Best Alternative Album and a nomination for Album of the Year. Paranoid Android, Karma Police and No Surprises were released as singles from the album, of which Karma Police was most successful internationally.
The release of OK Computer was followed by the Against Demons world tour. Grant Gee, the director of the No Surprises video, accompanied and filmed the band, releasing the footage in the 1999 documentary Meeting People Is Easy. The film portrays the band's disaffection with the music industry and press, showing their burnout as they progressed from their first tour dates in mid-1997 to mid-1998, nearly a year later. The film is also notable for documenting earlier versions of songs that were never released or were not released until years later, such as How to Disappear Completely, Life in a Glasshouse, I Will and Nude. During this time the band also released a music video compilation, 7 Television Commercials, as well as two EPs, Airbag/How Am I Driving? and No Surprises/Running from Demons, that compiled their B-sides from OK Computer singles.
 Kid A, Amnesiac and a change in sound (1999–2001)


Radiohead were largely inactive following their 1997–1998 tour; after its end, their only public performance in 1998 was at an Amnesty International concert in Paris. Yorke later admitted that during that period the band came close to splitting up, and that he had developed severe depression. In early 1999, Radiohead began work on a follow-up to OK Computer. Although there was no longer any pressure or even a deadline from their record label, tension during this period was high. Band members all had different visions for Radiohead's future, and Yorke was experiencing writer's block, influencing him toward a more abstract, fragmented form of songwriting. Radiohead secluded themselves with producer Nigel Godrich in studios in Paris, Copenhagen, and Gloucester, and in their newly completed studio in Oxford. Eventually, all the members agreed on a new musical direction, redefining their instrumental roles in the band. After nearly 18 months, Radiohead's recording sessions were completed in April 2000.
In October 2000 Radiohead released their fourth album, Kid A, the first of two albums from these recording sessions. Rather than being a stylistic sequel to OK Computer, Kid A featured a minimalist and textured style with less overt guitar parts and more diverse instrumentation including the ondes Martenot, programmed electronic beats, strings, and jazz horns. It debuted at number one in many countries, including the US, where its debut atop the Billboard chart marked a first for the band, and the first US number one album by any UK musician since the Spice Girls in 1996. This success was attributed variously to marketing, to the album's leak on the file-sharing network Napster a few months before its release, and to advance anticipation based, in part, on the success of OK Computer. Although Radiohead did not release any singles from Kid A, promos of Optimistic and Idioteque received radio play, and a series of blips, or short videos set to portions of tracks, were played on music channels and released freely on the Internet. The band had read Naomi Klein's anti-globalisation book No Logo during the recording, and they decided to continue a summer 2000 tour of Europe later in the year in a custom-built tent free of advertising; they also promoted Kid A with three sold-out North American theatre concerts.
Kid A received a Grammy Award for Best Alternative Album and a nomination for Album of the Year in early 2001. It won both praise and criticism in independent music circles for appropriating underground styles of music; some mainstream British critics saw Kid A as a commercial suicide note, labelling it intentionally difficult and longing for a return to the band's earlier style. Radiohead's fans were similarly divided; along with those who were appalled or mystified, there were many who saw the album as the band's best work. Yorke, however, denied that Radiohead had set out to eschew commercial expectations, saying, I was really, really amazed at how badly [Kid A] was being viewed ... because the music's not that hard to grasp. We're not trying to be difficult ... We're actually trying to communicate but somewhere along the line, we just seemed to piss off a lot of people ... What we're doing isn't that radical.
Amnesiac, released in June 2001, comprised additional tracks from the Kid A recording sessions. Radiohead's musical style on these songs was similar to that of Kid A in their fusion of electronic music and jazz influences, though more reliant on the use of guitars. The record was a critical and commercial success worldwide, it topped the UK Albums Chart and reached number two in the US, being nominated for a Grammy Award and the Mercury Music Prize. After Amnesiac's release, the band embarked on a world tour, visiting North America, Europe and Japan. Meanwhile, Pyramid Song and Knives Out, Radiohead's first issued singles since 1998, were modestly successful, and I Might Be Wrong, initially planned as a third single, expanded into Radiohead's thus far only live record. I Might Be Wrong: Live Recordings, released in November 2001, featured performances of seven songs from Kid A and Amnesiac along with the acoustic, previously unreleased True Love Waits.
 Hail to the Thief and departure from EMI (2002–04)

During July and August 2002, Radiohead toured Portugal and Spain, playing a number of newly written songs. They then recorded the new material in two weeks in a Los Angeles studio with Nigel Godrich, adding several tracks later in Oxford, where the band continued their work into the next year. Radiohead members described the recording process as relaxed, in contrast to the tense sessions for Kid A and Amnesiac. The band's sixth album, Hail to the Thief, was released in June 2003. Mixing sounds from throughout their career, the album combined guitar-based rock with electronic influences and topical lyrics by Yorke.Hail to the Thief enjoyed commercial success, debuting at number one in the UK and number three on the Billboard chart and eventually being certified platinum in the UK and gold in the US. The album's singles, There There, Go to Sleep and 2 + 2 = 5, achieved a level of play on modern rock radio. At the 2003 Grammy Awards, Radiohead were again nominated for Best Alternative Album, while producer Godrich and engineer Darrell Thorp received the Grammy Award for Best Engineered Album.
Yorke denied that Hail to the Thief's title was a comment on the controversial 2000 US presidential election, explaining that he first heard the words in a BBC Radio 4 discussion of 19th century American politics. Yorke said his lyrics had been affected by news reports of war in 2001 to 2002 and the feeling that we are entering an age of intolerance and fear where the power to express ourselves in a democracy and have our voices heard is being denied us but said, [Radiohead] didn't write a protest record, we didn't write a political record. After the release of Hail to the Thief, Radiohead embarked in May 2003 on a world tour, including a headlining performance at the Glastonbury Festival. The tour finished in May 2004 with a performance at the Coachella Festival. During their tour, the band released COM LAG, an EP compiling most of their B-sides from the time. Following their tour, the band began writing and rehearsing in their Oxford studio but soon went on hiatus. Free of their label contract, Radiohead spent the remainder of 2004 resting with their families and working on solo projects.
 In Rainbows, independent work and pay what you want (2005–08)


Radiohead began work on their seventh album in February 2005. In September 2005, the band recorded a piano-based song, I Want None of This, for the War Child charity album Help: A Day in the Life. The album was sold online, with I Want None of This being the most downloaded track, although it was not released as a single. Radiohead had already begun recording their next album on their own and then with producer Mark Stent. However, in late 2006, after touring Europe and North America and debuting 13 new songs there, the band resumed work with Nigel Godrich in London, Oxford and several rural locations in Somerset, England. Work was finished in June 2007 and the recordings were mastered the following month.
Radiohead's seventh album, In Rainbows, was released through the band's own website in October 2007 as a digital download for which customers could make whatever payment that they deemed appropriate (Pay what you want), including paying nothing at all; the site only advised, it's up to you. Following the band's sudden announcement 10 days beforehand, Radiohead's unusual strategy received much notice within the music industry and beyond. 1.2 million downloads were reportedly sold by the day of release, but the band's management did not release official sales figures, claiming that the Internet-only distribution was intended to boost later retail sales. In a 2011 appearance on The Colbert Report, Ed O'Brien said of the self-distribution strategy: We sell less records, but we make more money. Colin Greenwood explained the Internet release as a way of avoiding the regulated playlists and straitened formats of radio and TV, ensuring fans around the world could all experience the music at the same time, and preventing leaks in advance of a physical release. A discbox, including a second disc from the recording sessions, vinyl and CD editions of the album, and a hardcover book of artwork, was also sold and shipped in late 2007.
In Rainbows was physically released in the UK in late December 2007 on XL Recordings and in North America in January 2008 on TBD Records, charting at number one both in the UK and in the US. The record's retail success in the US- after having been legally available for months as a free download- marked Radiohead's highest chart success in that country since Kid A, while it was their fifth UK number one album. In Rainbows sold more than three million copies within one year of release.In Rainbows also received extremely positive reviews, among the best of Radiohead's career; critics praised the album for having a more accessible sound and personal style of lyrics than their past work. The album was nominated for the short list of the Mercury Music Prize, and went on to win the 2009 Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album. Their production team won the Grammy for Best Boxed or Special Limited Edition Package, while Radiohead received their third nomination for Album of the Year. Along with three other nominations for the band, Godrich's production work and the House of Cards music video also received nominations.
Radiohead released a number of singles from In Rainbows in support of the album; Jigsaw Falling into Place, the first, was released in the UK in January 2008. The second single, Nude, debuted at number 37 in the Billboard Hot 100, Radiohead's first song to make that chart since 1995's High and Dry and their first top 40 hit in the US since Creep. Radiohead continued to put out tracks from In Rainbows as singles and videos; in July a digitally shot video for House of Cards was made available. House of Cards, along with Bodysnatchers, also received a single release on radio. In September the band announced a fourth single, Reckoner, and a remix competition similar to one organised for Nude. A greatest hits album, titled Radiohead: The Best Of, was released by EMI in June 2008. The compilation was made without the input of the band and also did not contain any songs from In Rainbows, as the band had already left their label. Yorke expressed his disapproval on behalf of Radiohead: We haven't really had any hits so what exactly is the purpose? ... It's a wasted opportunity in that if we'd been behind it, and we wanted to do it, then it might have been good. From mid-2008 to early 2009, Radiohead toured North America, Europe, Japan, Mexico and South America to promote In Rainbows. The band headlined the Reading and Leeds Festivals in August 2009.
 The King of Limbs and physical movements (2009–present)

In May 2009, the band began new recording sessions with producer Nigel Godrich. In August of that year, Radiohead released two singles from these sessions on their website. First, Harry Patch (In Memory Of), was recorded in tribute to Harry Patch, the last surviving British soldier to have fought in the First World War, who had recently died. The song was sold for £1, with proceeds donated to the British Legion. Harry Patch (In Memory Of) featured Thom Yorke singing lyrics based on Patch's own statements about his war experience, over a string orchestra backdrop arranged by Jonny Greenwood. Later that month, a new song These Are My Twisted Words, was made available as a free download. Jonny Greenwood explained that the song had been one of the first products of the band's recent studio sessions.
Yorke had suggested at the time the band might turn their attention to more singles or EPs, including the possibility of recording more orchestral music, but as they continued work into 2010, a longer record became their focus. Meanwhile, in January 2010, while Radiohead members were in Los Angeles to record, the band played their only gig of the year as a benefit for Oxfam. Tickets were auctioned to the highest bidders, allowing the show at L.A.'s Henry Fonda Theater to raise over half a million US dollars for the NGO's work in Haiti, which earlier that month had been hit by a devastating earthquake. A group of fans edited together digital video taken by attendees to make a multi-camera document of the concert, which they made available through YouTube and torrents in December 2010, with the band's support and a pay what you want link to donate to Oxfam. In 2010, another collective of fans made a not-for-profit video of Radiohead's 2009 Prague concert and distributed it freely online, with soundboard audio provided by the band. Organizers of the Prague project said that, within five months of releasing the multi-format show online, it had been downloaded almost 100,000 times.Live in Praha and Radiohead for Haiti were reviewed by mainstream media and were described as examples of the band's openness to fans and their positivity toward non-commercial forms of Internet distribution.
Radiohead finished recordings in January 2011 and, having recorded their eighth album without a record contract, self-released it independently. The King of Limbs was announced on Valentine's Day and released four days later in February 2011 through the band's web site. The only initial publicity was a music video for the song Lotus Flower. The King of Limbs was released in CD, vinyl and standard download formats in March, and in a newspaper album, which included art, writings, and a CD as well as vinyl edition of the record, in May. In March, to coincide with the retail release of the album, the band also issued The Universal Sigh, a different edition of the custom newspaper, featuring poetry, stories, essays, lyrics, and art, for which the band employed people to distribute it free in the centre of select cities throughout the world. After being sold exclusively through the band's website for nearly two months, The King of Limbs charted at number seven in the United Kingdom on its retail release in late March 2011, becoming the band's first album since The Bends not to debut at number one in the UK. In the United States it reached number three, on par with the band's last major label release, 2003's Hail to the Thief. In July 2011 The King of Limbs vinyl edition was reported to be the best-selling vinyl of the year by a large margin, and Radiohead were credited with helping an ongoing surge in vinyl sales.
The King of Limbs received a more mixed reception on its initial release than much of Radiohead's work. Most critics praised the album and many of them highly praised some aspects of it, but even the most positive critics sounded uncertain about its place in the band's recording career. Some openly questioned its relevance in the contemporary musical climate. Some fans who had waited four years for a new album questioned its eight-song track listing, shorter than any of the band's past releases; a large segment of fans even believed, until proven otherwise, that there would be a part two, based on rumors and purported codes in the album art and lyrics. Reviewers considered the album to be further from Radiohead's alternative rock beginnings than any of their work since Kid A and Amnesiac and generally saw the album as more rhythmic than any of their past work, with prominent bass and looped percussion reputed to draw influence from experimental forms of dance, hip hop and dubstep. The King of Limbs, reportedly named after a 1000-year-old tree in rural England, also had elements of folk rock, jazz and psychedelia in its use of acoustic guitar, orchestrations and field recorded natural sounds. Some of Yorke's vocal and lyrical contributions were compared to the personal, soulful style critics noted in In Rainbows. Some reviews were uncertain about the congruence between these aesthetics, while others praised the band's ability to merge these seemingly divergent influences. The band's use of sampling as a mode of production was nothing new, having been employed as early as the drum loops of Airbag, but it met with more confusion on The King of Limbs due to the band's new recording methods and their lack of interviews about this recording process, which made it initially unclear whether some band members had contributed significantly to the album.
The band chose not to promote The King of Limbs in a traditional way, failing even to disclose its tracklist in advance, and forgoing a full tour for a year, whereas they had always toured concurrent with the release of prior albums. Although Ed O'Brien and other band members made occasional comments on the album in the weeks and months after its release, Yorke did not give any interviews until eight months after the album's release, and his comments gave only a few details of its musical or lyrical inspirations. He described the record as an expression of physical movements and wildness ideas, also noting his own environmental worries at the time. Band members also explained that its production process had differed from any of their earlier electronic work, a fact which few of the countless reviews had guessed. The band constructed songs as a group, using software designed by Jonny Greenwood to physically manipulate their own recordings and emulate old school vinyl turntablist techniques- a contrast with both standard rock recording and the computer-based mode of production on Kid A and Amnesiac. As with Kid A, no official singles were released from The King of Limbs; however, Lotus Flower charted in a number of countries due to digital sales or radio airplay, and manipulations of its music video, featuring Thom Yorke dancing, became a popular internet meme.
Following the album's release, the band immediately returned to work on new music in lieu of touring. On 16 April 2011, Radiohead released a single on vinyl, Supercollider / The Butcher, for Record Store Day. The band revealed that they began work on both songs during sessions for The King of Limbs, but later decided they didn't fit on it. Supercollider, at over seven minutes, is the longest studio-recorded song ever released by Radiohead. Digital files of the songs were made available at no cost to anyone who had already purchased the album on the band's website, and the band uploaded audio of the songs to their YouTube channel. Radiohead also released a series of remixes from The King of Limbs on various 12 vinyls, with an remix album, TKOL RMX 1234567 released on 16 September. Remixers include Caribou, Jacques Greene, Lone and Four Tet. The band also uploaded each remix to their YouTube channel and website for free streaming.[citation needed]The King of Limbs and TKOL RMX 1234567 were released on the band's own imprint label, Ticker Tape Ltd., owned by the band's label XL Recordings.
On 21 June 2011, a video of the band performing a new song, Staircase, was uploaded by the band to YouTube. On 24 June 2011, Radiohead played as a secret act at the Glastonbury Festival, where they introduced another new song previously performed by Yorke, The Daily Mail. The band made their first public performance of many songs from The King of Limbs at Glastonbury, for which they were joined by a guest member, also seen in the Staircase video, Portishead touring drummer Clive Deamer. In July 2011, a number of television channels around the world debuted a taped live performance featuring Radiohead and Deamer performing every song from The King of Limbs, as well as The Daily Mail and the previously seen Staircase. The latter two songs were released as a double single later in the year. In December 2011, The King of Limbs: Live from the Basement was issued on DVD and Blu-ray, including a version of Supercollider that had been left out of the earlier broadcast version.
Radiohead performed their first announced concert with Deamer in late September 2011, when they played two dates at New York City's famed Roseland Ballroom. Radiohead were described as having reinvented their King of Limbs studio recordings live, emphasising rhythm. They also made TV appearances, including a one-hour special episode of The Colbert Report. In February 2012 Radiohead began their first extended tour of North America in four years, including dates in the United States, Canada and Mexico. This was to be followed by dates in Europe and Japan, as well as the band's first concerts ever in Taiwan and South Korea, their first concert in New Zealand in 14 years and their first tour of Australia in eight years. Deamer was part of the band's line-up throughout the tour, and may have participated in a recording session the band conducted in Nashville in June 2012. The band's opening acts on the tour are American indie folk band Other Lives and Canadian experimental dance musician Caribou.
On 16 June 2012, an hour before gates were due to open at Toronto's Downsview Park for the final concert of Radiohead's North American tour, the roof of the venue's temporary stage collapsed, killing drum technician Scott Johnson and injuring three other members of Radiohead's touring technical crew. The collapse also destroyed the band's light show and much of their musical equipment. The concert was cancelled and Radiohead's tour dates in Europe were postponed. An investigation by the provincial government of Ontario into the cause of the accident is under way. Phil Selway wrote about the loss of Scott Johnson on the band's blog. After rescheduling the tour, Radiohead paid tribute to Scott Johnson and their stage crew at their next concert, in Nîmes, France in July. The band eventually rescheduled their tour dates and are scheduled to complete their tour in November 2012. The band have not been interviewed publicly since the incident, but Dan Snaith, the frontman of Caribou, has spoken about it briefly.
 Style and songwriting

Among Radiohead members' earliest influences were Queen and Elvis Costello; post-punk acts such as Joy Division and Magazine; and significantly 1980s alternative rock bands such as R.E.M., Pixies, The Smiths and Sonic Youth. By the mid-1990s, Radiohead began to adopt some recording methods from hip hop, inspired by the sampling work of DJ Shadow. They also became interested in using computers to generate sounds. Other influences on the group were Miles Davis and Ennio Morricone, along with 1960s rock groups, such as The Beatles and The Beach Boys, and Phil Spector's wall of sound productions for girl groups. Jonny Greenwood also cited composer Krzysztof Penderecki as an inspiration on the sound of OK Computer. The electronic music of Kid A and Amnesiac was inspired by Thom Yorke's admiration for glitch, ambient techno and IDM as exemplified by Warp Records artists such as Autechre and Aphex Twin, and the album also sampled from early computer music. The jazz of Charles Mingus, Alice Coltrane, and Miles Davis, and 1970s krautrock bands such as Can and Neu!, were other major influences during this period. Jonny Greenwood's interest in 20th century classical music also had a role, as the influence of both Penderecki and composer Olivier Messiaen was apparent; for several songs on Kid A and later albums, Greenwood has played the ondes Martenot, an early electronic instrument popularised by Messiaen. While working on Hail to the Thief, Radiohead put renewed emphasis on guitar rock. The Beatles, The Rolling Stones and particularly Neil Young were reported sources of inspiration to the band during this period. Since beginning to record In Rainbows, Radiohead members have mentioned a variety of rock, electronic, hip hop and experimental musicians as influences, including Björk, M.I.A, Liars, Modeselektor and Spank Rock. Since leaving their major label, the band members have been interviewed less frequently, more often posting office charts of their favourite songs of the moment on their blog Dead Air Space. In 2011, Thom Yorke denied Radiohead had ever set out deliberately to change musical styles or to make experimental music, saying band members are constantly absorbing music and a variety of musicians are always influencing their work.
Since their formation, Radiohead have been lyrically and musically spearheaded by Thom Yorke. Although Yorke is responsible for writing nearly all the lyrics, songwriting is a collaborative effort, and it has been noted in interviews that all the band members have roles in the process. As a result, all the band's songs are officially credited to Radiohead. The Kid A/Amnesiac sessions brought about a change in Radiohead's musical style, and an even more radical change in the band's working method. Since the band's shift from standard rock music instrumentation toward an emphasis on electronic sound, band members have had greater flexibility and now regularly switch instruments depending on the particular song requirements. On Kid A and Amnesiac, Yorke played keyboard and bass, while Jonny Greenwood often played ondes Martenot rather than guitar, bassist Colin Greenwood worked on sampling, and O'Brien and Selway branched out to drum machines and digital manipulations, also finding ways to incorporate their primary instruments, guitar and percussion, respectively, into the new sound. The relaxed 2003 recording sessions for Hail to the Thief led to a different dynamic in Radiohead, with Yorke admitting in interviews that [his] power within the band was absolutely unbalanced and [he] would subvert everybody else's power at all costs. But ... it's actually a lot more healthy now, democracy wise, than it used to be.
 Collaborators


Radiohead have maintained a close relationship with a number of frequent collaborators since early in their career. Record producer Nigel Godrich made his name with Radiohead, working with the band as an audio engineer since The Bends, and as their producer on all six studio albums since OK Computer. He has, at times, been dubbed the sixth member of the band in an allusion to George Martin being called the Fifth Beatle.Graphic artist Stanley Donwood, another longtime associate of the band, met Thom Yorke when both were art students, and together with Yorke, has produced all of Radiohead's album covers and visual artwork since 1994. Donwood and Yorke won a Grammy in 2002 for a special edition of Amnesiac packaged as a library book. Dilly Gent has been responsible for commissioning all Radiohead music videos since OK Computer, working with the band to find a director suitable for each project. Since the band's inception, Andi Watson has been their lighting and stage director, designing the visuals of Radiohead's live concerts, such as the carbon-neutral LED forest of the In Rainbows tour. The band's chief live technician, Peter Clements, or Plank, has worked with the band since before The Bends, overseeing the setup of their instruments for both studio recordings and live performances.
 Band members



Colin Greenwood – bass guitar, keyboards

Jonny Greenwood – guitar, keyboards, ondes Martenot, analog synthesisers, other instruments

Ed O'Brien – guitar, percussion, backing vocals

Philip Selway – drums, percussion, backing vocals

Thom Yorke – lead vocals, guitar, keyboards, piano


Additional live members



Clive Deamer – drums, percussion, backing vocals (2011–present)

 Discography




Pablo Honey (1993)

The Bends (1995)

OK Computer (1997)

Kid A (2000)

Amnesiac (2001)

Hail to the Thief (2003)

In Rainbows (2007)

The King of Limbs (2011)

 Awards and nominations


